--- 
title: Arguing for Immortality
date: 30/04/2011
tags: notable

I want to live forever. I've always thought that not dying was a pretty 
obvious thing to want. To my surprise, I've found that a lot of people 
whom I usually agree with on most topics strongly disagree with me on 
this one. Rather than write yet another piece extolling the virtues of 
a far-future post-scarcity post-singularity world, I thought I'd just 
document some of the objections to immortality I get and my 
counterarguments. ~

Note that for the purposes of giving my conversational partners 
opportunities to disagree, I typically posit a form of immortality where 
you, and you alone are presented with the option of eternal youth with 
no suicide option. You constantly regenerate to perfect health at the
prime of your life. There are a lot of potential ways we might go about 
not dying, but people tend to find objections to this particular flavor 
more readily than the others. Please assume this working definition for 
the below. 

Watching your loved ones die
----------------------------

I get this one the most. The argument goes like 

> I can't stand the thought of having to watch everyone I love die. Can 
you imagine living forever with everyone you used to know gone? How 
could you deal with the pain of building lifelong relationships and then 
seeing them disappear, forever? 

My response to this is essentially, "*Newsflash*, you already are going 
to have to deal with that." If you are above average in caution, 
intelligence, or just plain old fitness, odds are you are going to have 
to watch a fair share of your friends die and still continue living for 
a significant period of time afterwards. Statistics don't lie. Accidents 
and cancer, while tragic, are inevitable.

As for having to carry the burden forever, we can again look to reality 
to answer this objection. "Time heals all wounds," is an adage for a 
reason. If you can deal with a friend being dead for twenty years (as 
people already do), it seems pretty likely you'll be able to deal with 
it for an indefinite future. As you live forever, you'll make new 
friends and get over the loss of old ones. It seems unlikely that it 
will be year 2769 of missing Fred that finally pushes you over the edge,
forever. What will probably actually happen is you just get really good
at coping.

I'll get bored and sick of life
-------------------------------

This one is simple enough. It goes 

> I feel awful enough when I'm bored as it is. If I live forever, won't 
I eventually just get bored after having done literally everything? I
can't even imagine my life past [X] years.

The way I deal with this is essentially Moore's Law. Each day, literally 
a year of video is uploaded to Youtube. Every year, more books than you 
could possibly read in a regular lifetime are written. As society 
increases exponentially in complexity, generation of interesting content 
explodes. It will be impossible for you to do everything when society 
invents new experiences faster than you can experience them. Sit back 
and enjoy the ride, you're immortal. 

As for the people who can't even imagine their long term prospects right
now, I say that this makes them perfectly suited for immortality. If
you lack a long term vision and focus on the short term, you'll never
be dragged down by your long past. The best mindset for happiness over a
long time period is *always* to enjoy the present.

Death's inevitability gives life meaning
----------------------------------------

Now we start waxing philosophic with stuff like,

> There is no good without evil. Having death exist gives my life 
meaning just like scarcity lends gold-backed currencies their value. I 
need to know that there is an end because it gives me a sense of urgency 
to my life. Without it I would just stagnate. 

To me this is like saying "shitting gives eating meaning." Does it? 
Evolution would beg to disagree if it were anything but a blind 
selection process. When was the last time you sat down for a great meal 
and said to yourself, "Thank god I'm going to die one day or this meal 
would be devoid of meaning"? What you do with your life is what lends it 
value or meaning, not the eventuality of death.

Besides, if you believe in death being necessary to lend your life
value, why go with the arbitrary time limit of your natural lifespan?
No one who has fielded this argument against me has agreed to just kill
themselves when they feel like they've basically achieved what they've
wanted to in life. The fact of the matter is that everyone chooses life
over death on a day-to-day basis, and actions speak louder than words.

What about the afterlife?
-------------------------

This one can be touchy, for obvious reasons. Let's go with the
reasonably neutral objection of,

> Suppose there is an afterlife. By taking immortality, I would be
missing out on a greater truth and the greatest party in or outside of
the universe.

Sure, you might be. But most religions (weighted by subscribers) don't 
fault you for not dying. If your purpose in living is to live according 
to your religion, immortality doesn't get in the way of that. 
Furthermore, at the end of eternity, which is a construct that should be 
available to gods, it seems reasonable that you will receive your just 
reward in any case. Religions also commonly posit Judgment Day scenarios 
in which all living humans will be placed into various afterlives. It 
seems reasonable here to assume that if a god so wishes it, your 
immortality will be revoked.

I'll be too different from everyone else
----------------------------------------

There are a couple variations on this theme. In its simplest form, 

> If I live forever and no one else does, I'll be endlessly meeting new 
people with the foreknowledge that I will outlive them. I'll be so 
fundamentally different from the average mortal person that I won't be 
able to form meaningful relationships. Nobody will understand me!

This one is more of a deal breaker on a case-by-case basis. If a person 
really feels that they will be well and truly alienated by being 
immortal, well, it's hard to tell them that they won't be. It's kind of 
self-fulfilling. That said, there a few things you can say. 

* *People actually will understand you* 

    If there's anything humans are good at, it's getting used to stuff.
In short order you and your future peers will be cracking wise about
your absurd inability to die over whatever the future equivalent of beer
is. Maybe mechano-beer. I'm pretty sure that after an eternity of
explaining yourself to mortals, you'll be extremely proficient at
helping other people understand who you are.

* *Science will eventually catch up*

    Lifespan lengthening technologies only need to make it to the point 
where they can increase a person's lifespan one year for every year of 
research before the masses become practically immortal. Wait long enough 
and you and your magical wish-granted immortality will be in good 
company. 

* *Being different is an asset*

    You can honestly just play your immortality for international
celebrity. Make a bid for president. Be rich. Honestly, being too much
like other people basically sucks. Being exceptional will make you
popular, not the opposite.

Disaster scenarios
------------------

This one is kind of morbid. I thought about simply forbidding it by 
adding a clause to the immortality definition, but it's interesting
enough to keep in. In a few words, 

> What if everyone but me gets wiped out? I don't think I could live as 
the only human being alive. Also, what if the government kidnaps me and 
uses me as a lab rat? What if I piss off some people enough to get me 
tortured forever? There might be times where I might actually need to 
kill myself, even if I would normally find living forever appealing. 

Coming up with a bulletproof answer to this one is hard. It's very 
tempting to say that no actual implementation of immortality will 
actually prevent you from dying in literally every case or rob you of 
the option of killing yourself. But really, that would be cheating.

A real counterargument has to take the form of, "You already run similar 
risks today, as a mortal." You can be used as a medical experiment or 
tortured this very day, and they can keep you alive for a very long 
time. As an immortal, it's likely that you will eventually outlive your 
captors.

Also consider that it's far more likely that any government or entity
with power will want your cooperation instead of your incarceration. You
could be the world's greatest astronaut or the guy who goes into
nuclear reactor cores melting down.

However, the extinction of the human race scenario actually does throw a 
wrench into this argument. To this, all I can really say is that the 
miniscule risk you run of a mass extinction is just a risk you'll have 
to swallow in order to reap the vast rewards of immortality. Maybe 
there's other life out there that you can find. Maybe in your spare time 
you'll engineer a way to rebuild the world. 

Wrap-up
-------

This is a fun topic for me, and I hope I've been interesting without
being *too* offensive to people on either side of the coin. This topic
is important in the sense that once you accept that immortality is a
pretty good idea, you open the door for a lot of other interesting
arguments to be made about rationality, ethics, and just general
decision making. If you feel I've made some sort of egregious error or
just want to weigh in for any reason, please feel free to comment below.

EDIT: The [Hacker News](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2511929)
discussion of this page is fairly interesting. Give it a try, too!